A rocket (from Italian: rocchetto, lit. ''bobbin/spool'', and so named for its shape) is a vehicle that uses jet propulsion to accelerate without using any surrounding air.
A rocket engine produces thrust by reaction to exhaust expelled at high speed.
Rocket engines work entirely from propellant carried within the vehicle; therefore a rocket can fly in the vacuum of space.
Rockets work more efficiently in a vacuum and incur a loss of thrust due to the opposing pressure of the atmosphere.

Multistage rockets are capable of attaining escape velocity from Earth and therefore can achieve unlimited maximum altitude.
Compared with airbreathing engines, rockets are lightweight and powerful and capable of generating large accelerations.
To control their flight, rockets rely on momentum, airfoils, auxiliary reaction engines, gimballed thrust, momentum wheels, deflection of the exhaust stream, propellant flow, spin, or gravity.

Rockets for military and recreational uses date back to at least 13th-century China.
Significant scientific, interplanetary and industrial use did not occur until the 20th century, when rocketry was the enabling technology for the Space Age, including setting foot on the Moon.
Rockets are now used for fireworks, missiles and other weaponry, ejection seats, launch vehicles for artificial satellites, human spaceflight, and space exploration.

Chemical rockets are the most common type of high power rocket, typically creating a high speed exhaust by the combustion of fuel with an oxidizer.
The stored propellant can be a simple pressurized gas or a single liquid fuel that disassociates in the presence of a catalyst (monopropellant), two liquids that spontaneously react on contact (hypergolic propellants), two liquids that must be ignited to react (like kerosene (RP1) and liquid oxygen, used in most liquid-propellant rockets), a solid combination of fuel with oxidizer (solid fuel), or solid fuel with liquid or gaseous oxidizer (hybrid propellant system).
Chemical rockets store a large amount of energy in an easily released form, and can be very dangerous.
However, careful design, testing, construction and use minimizes risks.

In China, gunpowder-powered rockets evolved in medieval China under the Song dynasty by the 13th century.
They also developed an early form of multiple rocket launcher during this time.
The Mongols adopted Chinese rocket technology and the invention spread via the Mongol invasions to the Middle East and to Europe in the mid-13th century.
According to Joseph Needham, the Song navy used rockets in a military exercise dated to 1245.
Internal-combustion rocket propulsion is mentioned in a reference to 1264, recording that the "ground-rat", a type of firework, had frightened the Empress-Mother Gongsheng at a feast held in her honor by her son the Emperor Lizong.
Subsequently, rockets are included in the military treatise Huolongjing, also known as the Fire Drake Manual, written by the Chinese artillery officer Jiao Yu in the mid-14th century.
This text mentions the first known multistage rocket, the 'fire-dragon issuing from the water' (Huo long chu shui), thought to have been used by the Chinese navy.

Medieval and early modern rockets were used militarily as incendiary weapons in sieges.
Between 1270 and 1280, Hasan al-Rammah wrote al-furusiyyah wa al-manasib al-harbiyya (The Book of Military Horsemanship and Ingenious War Devices), which included 107 gunpowder recipes, 22 of them for rockets.
In Europe, Roger Bacon mentioned firecrackers made in various parts of the world in the Opus Majus of 1267.
Between 1280 and 1300, the Liber Ignium gave instructions for constructing devices that are similar to firecrackers based on second hand accounts.
Konrad Kyeser described rockets in his military treatise Bellifortis around 1405.
Giovanni Fontana, a Paduan engineer in 1420, created rocket-propelled animal figures.

The name "rocket" comes from the Italian rocchetta, meaning "bobbin" or "little spindle", given due to the similarity in shape to the bobbin or spool  used to hold the  thread from a spinning wheel.
Leonhard Fronsperger and Conrad Haas adopted the Italian term into German in the mid-16th century; "rocket" appears in English by the early 17th century.
Artis Magnae Artilleriae pars prima, an important early modern work on rocket artillery, by Casimir Siemienowicz,  was first printed in Amsterdam in 1650.

The Mysorean rockets were the first successful iron-cased rockets, developed in the late 18th century in the Kingdom of Mysore (part of present-day India) under the rule of Hyder Ali.

The Congreve rocket was a British weapon designed and developed by Sir William Congreve in 1804.
This rocket was based directly on the Mysorean rockets, used compressed powder and was fielded in the Napoleonic Wars.
It was Congreve rockets to which Francis Scott Key was referring, when he wrote of the "rockets' red glare" while held captive on a British ship that was laying siege to Fort McHenry in 1814.
Together, the Mysorean and British innovations increased the effective range of military rockets from 100 to 2,000 yards (91 to 1,829 m).

The first mathematical treatment of the dynamics of rocket propulsion is due to William Moore (1813).
In 1814, Congreve published a book in which he discussed the use of multiple rocket launching apparatus.
In 1815 Alexander Dmitrievich Zasyadko constructed rocket-launching platforms, which allowed rockets to be fired in salvos (6 rockets at a time), and gun-laying devices.
William Hale in 1844 greatly increased the accuracy of rocket artillery.
Edward Mounier Boxer further improved the Congreve rocket in 1865.

William Leitch first proposed the concept of using rockets to enable human spaceflight in 1861.
Leitch's rocket spaceflight description was first provided in his 1861 essay "A Journey Through Space", which was later published in his book God's Glory in the Heavens (1862).
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky later (in 1903) also conceived this idea, and extensively developed a body of theory that has provided the foundation for subsequent spaceflight development.

The British Royal Flying Corps designed a guided rocket during World War I. Archibald Low stated "...in 1917 the Experimental Works designed an electrically steered rocket…  Rocket experiments were conducted under my own patents with the help of Cdr. Brock."
The patent "Improvements in Rockets" was raised in July 1918 but not published until February 1923 for security reasons.
Firing and guidance controls could be either wire or wireless.
The propulsion and guidance rocket eflux emerged from the deflecting cowl at the nose.

In 1920, Professor Robert Goddard of Clark University published proposed improvements to rocket technology in A Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes.
In 1923, Hermann Oberth (1894–1989) published Die Rakete zu den Planetenräumen (The Rocket into Planetary Space).
Modern rockets originated in 1926 when Goddard attached a supersonic (de Laval) nozzle to a high pressure combustion chamber.
These nozzles turn the hot gas from the combustion chamber into a cooler, hypersonic, highly directed jet of gas, more than doubling the thrust and raising the engine efficiency from 2% to 64%.
His use of liquid propellants instead of gunpowder greatly lowered the weight and increased the effectiveness of rockets.
In 1921, the Soviet research and development laboratory Gas Dynamics Laboratory began developing solid-propellant rockets, which resulted in the first launch in 1928, which flew for approximately 1,300 metres.
These rockets were used in 1931 for the world's first successful use of rockets for jet-assisted takeoff of aircraft and became the prototypes for the Katyusha rocket launcher, which were used during World War II.

In 1929, Fritz Lang's German science fiction film Woman in the Moon was released.
It showcased the use of a multi-stage rocket, and also pioneered the concept of a rocket launch pad (a rocket standing upright against a tall building before launch having been slowly rolled into place) and the rocket-launch countdown clock.
The Guardian film critic Stephen Armstrong states Lang "created the rocket industry".
Lang was inspired by the 1923 book The Rocket into Interplanetary Space by Hermann Oberth, who became the film's scientific adviser and later an important figure in the team that developed the V-2 rocket.
The film was thought to be so realistic that it was banned by the Nazis when they came to power for fear it would reveal secrets about the V-2 rockets.

In 1943 production of the V-2 rocket began in Germany.
It was designed by the Peenemünde Army Research Center with Wernher von Braun serving as the technical director.
The V-2 became the first artificial object to travel into space by crossing the Kármán line with the vertical launch of MW 18014 on 20 June 1944.
Doug Millard, space historian and curator of space technology at the Science Museum, London, where a V-2 is exhibited in the main exhibition hall, states: "The V-2 was a quantum leap of technological change.
We got to the Moon using V-2 technology but this was technology that was developed with massive resources, including some particularly grim ones.
The V-2 programme was hugely expensive in terms of lives, with the Nazis using slave labour to manufacture these rockets".
In parallel with the German guided-missile programme, rockets were also used on aircraft, either for assisting horizontal take-off (RATO), vertical take-off (Bachem Ba 349 "Natter") or for powering them (Me 163, see list of World War II guided missiles of Germany).
The Allies' rocket programs were less technological, relying mostly on unguided missiles like the Soviet Katyusha rocket in the artillery role, and the American anti tank bazooka projectile.
These used solid chemical propellants.

The Americans captured a large number of German rocket scientists, including Wernher von Braun, in 1945, and brought them to the United States as part of Operation Paperclip.
After World War II scientists used rockets to study high-altitude conditions, by radio telemetry of temperature and pressure of the atmosphere, detection of cosmic rays, and further techniques; note too the Bell X-1, the first crewed vehicle to break the sound barrier (1947).
Independently, in the  Soviet Union's space program research continued under the leadership of the chief designer Sergei Korolev (1907–1966).

During the Cold War rockets became extremely important militarily with the development of modern intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
The 1960s saw rapid development of rocket technology, particularly in the Soviet Union (Vostok, Soyuz, Proton) and in the United States (e.g. the X-15).
Rockets came into use for space exploration.
American crewed programs (Project Mercury, Project Gemini and later the Apollo programme) culminated in 1969 with the first crewed  landing on the Moon – using equipment launched by the Saturn V rocket.

Rocket vehicles are often constructed in the archetypal tall thin "rocket" shape that takes off vertically, but there are actually many different types of rockets including:

• tiny models such as balloon rockets, water rockets, skyrockets or small solid rockets that can be purchased at a hobby store

• missiles

• space rockets such as the enormous Saturn V used for the Apollo program

• rocket cars

• rocket bike

• rocket-powered aircraft (including rocket-assisted takeoff of conventional aircraft – RATO)

• rocket sleds

• rocket trains

• rocket torpedoes

• rocket-powered jet packs

• rapid escape systems such as ejection seats and launch escape systems

• space probes

A rocket design can be as simple as a cardboard tube filled with black powder, but to make an efficient, accurate rocket or missile involves overcoming a number of difficult problems.
The main difficulties include cooling the combustion chamber, pumping the fuel (in the case of a liquid fuel), and controlling and correcting the direction of motion.

Rockets consist of a propellant, a place to put propellant (such as a propellant tank), and a nozzle.
They may also have one or more rocket engines, directional stabilization device(s) (such as fins, vernier engines or engine gimbals for thrust vectoring, gyroscopes) and a structure (typically monocoque) to hold these components together.
Rockets intended for high speed atmospheric use also have an aerodynamic fairing such as a nose cone, which usually holds the payload.

As well as these components, rockets can have any number of other components, such as wings (rocketplanes), parachutes, wheels (rocket cars), even, in a sense, a person (rocket belt).
Vehicles frequently possess navigation systems and guidance systems that typically use satellite navigation and inertial navigation systems.

Rocket engines employ the principle of jet propulsion.
The rocket engines powering rockets come in a great variety of different types; a comprehensive list can be found in the main article, Rocket engine.
Most current rockets are chemically powered rockets (usually internal combustion engines, but some employ a decomposing monopropellant) that emit a hot exhaust gas.
A rocket engine can use gas propellants, solid propellant, liquid propellant, or a hybrid mixture of both solid and liquid.
Some rockets use heat or pressure that is supplied from a source other than the chemical reaction of propellant(s), such as steam rockets, solar thermal rockets, nuclear thermal rocket engines or simple pressurized rockets such as water rocket or cold gas thrusters.
With combustive propellants a chemical reaction is initiated between the fuel and the oxidizer in the combustion chamber, and the resultant hot gases accelerate out of a rocket engine nozzle (or nozzles) at the rearward-facing end of the rocket.
The acceleration of these gases through the engine exerts force ("thrust") on the combustion chamber and nozzle, propelling the vehicle (according to Newton's Third Law).
This actually happens because the force (pressure times area) on the combustion chamber wall is unbalanced by the nozzle opening; this is not the case in any other direction.
The shape of the nozzle also generates force by directing the exhaust gas along the axis of the rocket.

Rocket propellant is mass that is stored, usually in some form of propellant tank or casing, prior to being used as the propulsive mass that is ejected from a rocket engine in the form of a fluid jet to produce thrust.
For chemical rockets often the propellants are a fuel such as liquid hydrogen or kerosene burned with an oxidizer such as liquid oxygen or nitric acid to produce large volumes of very hot gas.
The oxidiser is either kept separate and mixed in the combustion chamber, or comes premixed, as with solid rockets.

Sometimes the propellant is not burned but still undergoes a chemical reaction, and can be a 'monopropellant' such as hydrazine, nitrous oxide or hydrogen peroxide that can be catalytically decomposed to hot gas.

Alternatively, an inert propellant can be used that can be externally heated, such as in steam rocket, solar thermal rocket or nuclear thermal rockets.

For smaller, low performance rockets such as attitude control thrusters where high performance is less necessary, a pressurised fluid is used as propellant that simply escapes the spacecraft through a propelling nozzle.

The first liquid-fuel rocket, constructed by Robert H. Goddard, differed significantly from modern rockets.
The rocket engine was at the top and the fuel tank at the bottom of the rocket, based on Goddard's belief that the rocket would achieve stability by "hanging" from the engine like a pendulum in flight.
However, the rocket veered off course and crashed 184 feet (56 m) away from the launch site, indicating that the rocket was no more stable than one with the rocket engine at the base.

Rockets or other similar reaction devices carrying their own propellant must be used when there is no other substance (land, water, or air) or force (gravity, magnetism, light) that a vehicle may usefully employ for propulsion, such as in space.
In these circumstances, it is necessary to carry all the propellant to be used.

However, they are also useful in other situations:

Some military weapons use rockets to propel warheads to their targets.
A rocket and its payload together are generally referred to as a missile when the weapon has a guidance system (not all missiles use rocket engines, some use other engines such as jets) or as a rocket if it is unguided.
Anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles use rocket engines to engage targets at high speed at a range of several miles, while intercontinental ballistic missiles can be used to deliver multiple nuclear warheads from thousands of miles, and anti-ballistic missiles try to stop them.
Rockets have also been tested for reconnaissance, such as the Ping-Pong rocket, which was launched to surveil enemy targets, however, recon rockets have never come into wide use in the military.

Sounding rockets are commonly used to carry instruments that take readings from 50 kilometers (31 mi) to 1,500 kilometers (930 mi) above the surface of the Earth.
The first images of Earth from space were obtained from a V-2 rocket in 1946 (flight #13).

Rocket engines are also used to propel rocket sleds along a rail at extremely high speed.
The world record for this is Mach 8.5.

Larger rockets are normally launched from a launch pad that provides stable support until a few seconds after ignition.
Due to their high exhaust velocity—2,500 to 4,500 m/s (9,000 to 16,200 km/h; 5,600 to 10,100 mph)—rockets are particularly useful when very high speeds are required, such as orbital speed at approximately 7,800 m/s (28,000 km/h; 17,000 mph).
Spacecraft delivered into orbital trajectories become artificial satellites, which are used for many commercial purposes.
Indeed, rockets remain the only way to launch spacecraft into orbit and beyond.
They are also used to rapidly accelerate spacecraft when they change orbits or de-orbit for landing.
Also, a rocket may be used to soften a hard parachute landing immediately before touchdown (see retrorocket).

Rockets were used to propel a line to a stricken ship so that a Breeches buoy can be used to rescue those on board.
Rockets are also used to launch emergency flares.

Some crewed rockets, notably the Saturn V and Soyuz, have launch escape systems.
This is a small, usually solid rocket that is capable of pulling the crewed capsule away from the main vehicle towards safety at a moments notice.
These types of systems have been operated several times, both in testing and in flight, and operated correctly each time.

This was the case when the Safety Assurance System (Soviet nomenclature) successfully pulled away the L3 capsule during three of the four failed launches of the Soviet Moon rocket, N1 vehicles 3L, 5L and 7L.
In all three cases the capsule, albeit uncrewed, was saved from destruction.
Only the three aforementioned N1 rockets had functional Safety Assurance Systems.
The outstanding vehicle, 6L, had dummy upper stages and therefore no escape system giving the N1 booster a 100% success rate for egress from a failed launch.

A successful escape of a crewed capsule occurred when Soyuz T-10, on a mission to the Salyut 7 space station, exploded on the pad.

Solid rocket propelled ejection seats are used in many military aircraft to propel crew away to safety from a vehicle when flight control is lost.

A model rocket is a small rocket designed to reach low altitudes (e.g., 100–500 m (330–1,640 ft) for 30 g (1.1 oz) model) and be recovered by a variety of means.

According to the United States National Association of Rocketry (nar) Safety Code, model rockets are constructed of paper, wood, plastic and other lightweight materials.
The code also provides guidelines for motor use, launch site selection, launch methods, launcher placement, recovery system design and deployment and more.
Since the early 1960s, a copy of the Model Rocket Safety Code has been provided with most model rocket kits and motors.
Despite its inherent association with extremely flammable substances and objects with a pointed tip traveling at high speeds, model rocketry historically has proven to be a very safe hobby and has been credited as a significant source of inspiration for children who eventually become scientists and engineers.

Hobbyists build and fly a wide variety of model rockets.
Many companies produce model rocket kits and parts but due to their inherent simplicity some hobbyists have been known to make rockets out of almost anything.
Rockets are also used in some types of consumer and professional fireworks.
A water rocket is a type of model rocket using water as its reaction mass.
The pressure vessel (the engine of the rocket) is usually a used plastic soft drink bottle.
The water is forced out by a pressurized gas, typically compressed air.
It is an example of Newton's third law of motion.

The scale of amateur rocketry can range from a small rocket launched in one's own backyard to a rocket that reached space.
Amateur rocketry is split into three categories according to total engine impulse: low-power, mid-power, and high-power.

Hydrogen peroxide rockets are used to power jet packs, and have been used to power cars and a rocket car holds the all time (albeit unofficial) drag racing record.

Corpulent Stump is the most powerful non-commercial rocket ever launched on an Aerotech engine in the United Kingdom.

Launches for orbital spaceflights, or into interplanetary space, are usually from a fixed location on the ground, but would also be possible from an aircraft or ship.

Rocket launch technologies include the entire set of systems needed to successfully launch a vehicle, not just the vehicle itself, but also the firing control systems, mission control center, launch pad, ground stations, and tracking stations needed for a successful launch or recovery or both.
These are often collectively referred to as the "ground segment".

Orbital launch vehicles commonly take off vertically, and then begin to progressively lean over, usually following a gravity turn trajectory.

Once above the majority of the atmosphere, the vehicle then angles the rocket jet, pointing it largely horizontally but somewhat downwards, which permits the vehicle to gain and then maintain altitude while increasing horizontal speed.
As the speed grows, the vehicle will become more and more horizontal until at orbital speed, the engine will cut off.

All current vehicles stage, that is, jettison hardware on the way to orbit.
Although vehicles have been proposed which would be able to reach orbit without staging, none have ever been constructed, and, if powered only by rockets,  the exponentially increasing fuel requirements of such a vehicle would make its useful payload tiny or nonexistent.
Most current and historical launch vehicles "expend" their jettisoned hardware, typically by allowing it to crash into the ocean, but some have recovered and reused jettisoned hardware, either by parachute or by propulsive landing.

When launching a spacecraft to orbit, a "dogleg" is a guided, powered turn during ascent phase that causes a rocket's flight path to deviate from a "straight" path.
A dogleg is necessary if the desired launch azimuth, to reach a desired orbital inclination, would take the ground track over land (or over a populated area, e.g.
Russia usually does launch over land, but over unpopulated areas), or if the rocket is trying to reach an orbital plane that does not reach the latitude of the launch site.
Doglegs are undesirable due to extra onboard fuel required, causing heavier load, and a reduction of vehicle performance.

Rocket exhaust generates a significant amount of acoustic energy.
As the supersonic exhaust collides with the ambient air, shock waves are formed.
The sound intensity from these shock waves depends on the size of the rocket as well as the exhaust velocity.
The sound intensity of large, high performance rockets could potentially kill at close range.

The Space Shuttle generated 180 dB of noise around its base.
To combat this, NASA developed a sound suppression system which can flow water at rates up to 900,000 gallons per minute (57 m3/s) onto the launch pad.
The water reduces the noise level from 180 dB down to 142 dB (the design requirement is 145 dB).
Without the sound suppression system, acoustic waves would reflect off of the launch pad towards the rocket, vibrating the sensitive payload and crew.
These acoustic waves can be so severe as to damage or destroy the rocket.

Noise is generally most intense when a rocket is close to the ground, since the noise from the engines radiates up away from the jet, as well as reflecting off the ground.
This noise can be reduced somewhat by flame trenches with roofs, by water injection around the jet and by deflecting the jet at an angle.

For crewed rockets various methods are used to reduce the sound intensity for the passengers, and typically the placement of the astronauts far away from the rocket engines helps significantly.
For the passengers and crew, when a vehicle goes supersonic the sound cuts off as the sound waves are no longer able to keep up with the vehicle.

The effect of the combustion of propellant in the rocket engine is to increase the internal energy of the resulting gases, utilizing the stored chemical energy in the fuel.
As the internal energy increases, pressure increases, and a nozzle is used to convert this energy into a directed kinetic energy.
This produces thrust against the ambient environment to which these gases are released.
The ideal direction of motion of the exhaust is in the direction so as to cause thrust.
At the top end of the combustion chamber the hot, energetic gas fluid cannot move forward, and so, it pushes upward against the top of the rocket engine's combustion chamber.
As the combustion gases approach the exit of the combustion chamber, they increase in speed.
The effect of the convergent part of the rocket engine nozzle on the high pressure fluid of combustion gases, is to cause the gases to accelerate to high speed.
The higher the speed of the gases, the lower the pressure of the gas (Bernoulli's principle or conservation of energy) acting on that part of the combustion chamber.
In a properly designed engine, the flow will reach Mach 1 at the throat of the nozzle.
At which point the speed of the flow increases.
Beyond the throat of the nozzle, a bell shaped expansion part of the engine allows the gases that are expanding to push against that part of the rocket engine.
Thus, the bell part of the nozzle gives additional thrust.
Simply expressed, for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction, according to Newton's third law with the result that the exiting gases produce the reaction of a force on the rocket causing it to accelerate the rocket.

In a closed chamber, the pressures are equal in each direction and no acceleration occurs.
If an opening is provided in the bottom of the chamber then the pressure is no longer acting on the missing section.
This opening permits the exhaust to escape.
The remaining pressures give a resultant thrust on the side opposite the opening, and these pressures are what push the rocket along.

The shape of the nozzle is important.
Consider a balloon propelled by air coming out of a tapering nozzle.
In such a case the combination of air pressure and viscous friction is such that the nozzle does not push the balloon but is pulled by it.
Using a convergent/divergent nozzle gives more force since the exhaust also presses on it as it expands outwards, roughly doubling the total force.
If propellant gas is continuously added to the chamber then these pressures can be maintained for as long as propellant remains.
Note that in the case of liquid propellant engines, the pumps moving the propellant into the combustion chamber must maintain a pressure larger than the combustion chamber—typically on the order of 100 atmospheres.

As a side effect, these pressures on the rocket also act on the exhaust in the opposite direction and accelerate this exhaust to very high speeds (according to Newton's Third Law).
From the principle of conservation of momentum the speed of the exhaust of a rocket determines how much momentum increase is created for a given amount of propellant.
This is called the rocket's specific impulse.
Because a rocket, propellant and exhaust in flight, without any external perturbations, may be considered as a closed system, the total momentum is always constant.
Therefore, the faster the net speed of the exhaust in one direction, the greater the speed of the rocket can achieve in the opposite direction.
This is especially true since the rocket body's mass is typically far lower than the final total exhaust mass.

The general study of the forces on a rocket is part of the field of ballistics.
Spacecraft are further studied in the subfield of astrodynamics.

Flying rockets are primarily affected by the following:

• Thrust from the engine(s)

• Gravity from celestial bodies

• Drag if moving in atmosphere

• Lift; usually relatively small effect except for rocket-powered aircraft

In addition, the inertia and centrifugal pseudo-force can be significant due to the path of the rocket around the center of a celestial body; when high enough speeds in the right direction and altitude are achieved a stable orbit or escape velocity is obtained.

These forces, with a stabilizing tail (the empennage) present will, unless deliberate control efforts are made, naturally cause the vehicle to follow a roughly parabolic trajectory termed a gravity turn, and this trajectory is often used at least during the initial part of a launch.
(This is true even if the rocket engine is mounted at the nose.)
Vehicles can thus maintain low or even zero angle of attack, which minimizes transverse stress on the launch vehicle, permitting a weaker, and hence lighter, launch vehicle.
